This is an abandoned attempt at DOW2, where the primary new feature is
allowing each member to choose what info they share with every ship at
a fairly fine level. It also implements database views such that each
member can access the database directly, and only see the information
that is legal for him to see according to all other members' sharing
settings.

This will likely only work with postgresql, since I'm depending on
details of user and group handling. Specifically, I depend on the
postgresql variable 'user', which contains the currently logged in
user. This allows us to join views on the current user. For example,

dow2=# CREATE VIEW udonors as (select * from alldonors where ship=user);

This causes the view "udonors" to consist of only the row in the
alldonors table where the 'ship' column is equal to the currently
logged user (e.g. "Mad Ninja"). By default, users cannot access *any*
tables. To allow members to see their views, we execute:

dow2=# GRANT SELECT ON udonors TO GROUP users;

Each DOW2 member must be in group 'users'. For example:

dow2=# CREATE USER "Mad Ninja" IN GROUP users PASSWORD 'super_secret';


The problem with this approach is that the various sharing tables get
really big really fast, since for each piece of information, we need
to store a list of the ships that can legally view that information.
I've tried some ways to optimize this, but I'm not sure if it's really
feasible. It would be very nice if it worked, however, since then
other people could write scripts for DOW2 and host them on their own
sites, only accessing DOW2 to grab the data they can legally see.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

The schema is a bit better than with DOW, and incorporates some
features such as DOMAINs and VIEWs that make management easier.

The concept of "information id" a.k.a. iid is critical. Each piece
of information that can be shared is given a unique id (from the
iid_seq auto incrementing sequence). This iid is then entered into the
"shared" table for each and every ship that is allowed to view this
piece of data according to the sharing settings of the donating ship.
Obviously, this means the "shared" table is huge".

As is typical, the "ushared" view contains only the elements of "shared"
for the particular user that's currently accessing the database.

